---
layout: postv2
title: DataEngBytes Perth 2024
font: serif
description: A run down of this year's conference talks
date: 2024-11-05
tags:
  - community
  - conference
  - perth
  - data
author: Donald Wade and Sophie Giraudo
---

## Gaze into the eye of the future. It's streaming.

> Miss out on this year's DataEngBytes conference? FOMO dialled to the max? Fear not. Mechanical Rock's intrepid team of conference-goers went along in person, so you didn't have to.\*

Since its beginnings in 2019, DataEngBytes has established itself as a real highlight of the Australian tech conference calendar, and true to form, it brought some great speakers to Perth this September. 

As the largest independent conference for data engineers and practitioners in Oceania, DataEngBytes has a proud mission to drive excellence and innovation in data engineering practices through the power of community.

In the first of a series, _Donald Wade_ and _Sophie Giraudo_ cast their line into the Kafka data stream and reel in some treasure.
### Adi Polak: Navigating streaming infrastructure

Adi shared her insight into what goes into designing infrastructure that will support the requirements of data streaming at scale. She particularly highlighted the importance of understanding key business priorities around issues such as acceptable latency vs infrastructure cost when it comes to designing these system.

Adi went on to explore some of the ways in which Flink Streaming and Spark Streaming differ in their approach, articulating the compelling argument that the best outcome for all concerned comes from the judicious selection of the right combination of different solutions.

_Globally renowned in the field, Adi specalises in Data Streaming and AI/ML at Confluent, and is the author of **Scaling Machine Learning Systems** (O'Reilly)_

### Chip Huyen: A unified dataframe API for different data back ends

In this talk, Chip introduced the audience to Ibis, an open source project designed to enable users to work with different back ends in different settings.

Chip walked the audience through some common use cases. Ibis defines a Python dataframe API that executes on any query engine - allowing for a consistent mechanism for interacting with a current list of 20+ back ends.

She explained how Ibis works "under the hood", and explored some of the hurdles on the way to achieving a unified API vision.

_Chip currently works at Voltron Data on GPU-native data processing. she is the author of Amazon bestseller in AI **Designing Machine Learning Systems** (O'Reilly)_

Find out more about Ibis at [ibis-project.org](https://ibis-project.org).

---

> \* _this isn't an excuse - if you could have gone in person, then you should have - that's how conferences survive - Ed_
> 
> And speaking of highlights of the Australian tech conference scene, Mechanical Rock are proud organisers of Latency 2025. Check out the conference site at [latencyconf.io](https://www.latencyconf.io/).

---
