---
layout: postv2
title: DataEngBytes Perth 2024
font: serif
description: A run down of this year's conference talks
date: 2024-11-07
tags:
  - community
  - conference
  - perth
  - data
  - data-modelling
author: Donald Wade and Sophie Giraudo
---

# Byting the dust:  siloed approaches to data modelling

> Miss out on this year's DataEngBytes conference? FOMO dialled to the max? Fear not. Mechanical Rock's intrepid team of conference-goers went along in person, so you didn't have to.

Since its beginnings in 2019, DataEngBytes has established itself as a real highlight of the Australian tech conference calendar, and true to form, it brought some great speakers to Perth this September. 

_Donald Wade_ and _Sophie Giraudo_ digest Joe Reis's talk on the future of data modelling.
## Joe Reis: Mixed Modal Arts

As well as being a world-renowned expert and teacher in all things data related, Joe Reis is a keen fan of Mixed Martial Arts, and his talk at this year's DataEngBytes used the evolution of MMA as a key metaphor to help drive a pretty compelling thesis.

Back in the early '90s, when MMA first became a "thing", competitors could just about get by in the ring if they were masters in their own discipline - be that boxing, Brazilian Jui Jitsu, Muay Thai.

But time moves on, and today, "just" being an expert at a single discipline just doesn't cut it. Not only do fighters need to know a _minimum_ of boxing, Brazilian Jiu Jitsu and Muay Thai - they need to know them _really, really well_.

Even more than that, to be truly effective, they need to have internalised the techniques to instinctively know when to apply which technique when.

### Wax on, wax off

As it is in the world of Mixed Martial Arts, so it is in the world of data.

Back in the day, it might have been enough for a practitioner to be a Kimball dimensional modelling or Data Vault expert, Joe argues. A software engineer might also be an expert at relational data modelling. And an ML engineer or data scientist would know the ins and outs feature engineering and deep learning.

Historically, experts in different fields had a tendency to stick to narrowly to their own lane, unconcerned with how people downstream might need or want to consume their output. But things are changing.

### AI is everywhere

AI is everywhere. It will move outside and beyond the current hype, and it is guaranteed to become increasingly pervasive. Multimodal data is also becoming more and more common. And of course the corporate world now increasingly looking to use LLMs to interrogate their data.

But, to quote Joe directly: "AI without good quality data means you'll do dumb things more quickly. And the underlying data model - combined with semantic structure (think knowledge graphs, semantic layers, etc) - is the key to making this work."

>AI without good quality data means you'll do dumb things more quickly. 

### Data-powered products are everywhere

A single software product today might rely heavily on OLAP processing to provide a better user experience for end users, and it might also use a Machine Learning model to drive another part of the customer experience. Depending on what you're using it for, the application data needs to be modelled differently.

As a result, anybody who works with data today needs to understand how to model data across a number of different situations.

The upshot is that roles within the world of data are evolving. Increasingly, practitioners need to know a wide variety of disciplines - and they need to know them really, really well - so that they know which technique to apply in which situation.

The future is as exciting as it is multi-disciplinary.

---

Joe is CEO of Ternary Data. He describes himself as a "recovering data scientist" and is co-author of the best-selling book **_Fundamentals of Data Engineering: Plan and Build Robust Data Systems_** (O'Reilly) and he co-hosts the popular podcast **_The Monday Morning Data Chat_**.

As well as Joe's DataEngBytes talk, we've used his original blog post as reference for this article. Please read it [here](https://joereis.substack.com/p/mixed-model-arts-the-convergence). 

---

Mechanical Rock has extensive experience helping clients increase their confidence in data-driven decision making. Find our more or get in touch with us [here](https://www.mechanicalrock.io/our-expertise/data-and-ai).

---
